There's a little bit of debate over
Anton's own naval experience, but we can
get into that. But Anton, you have some
naval experience, sort of. Are you
teeing it up for Margo to make fun of me
now because I was just a reservist? So I
fully embrace the fact that I do not
have grand military experience, okay? I
served, I was in the reserves, I put on
the uniform, I wish it could still fit,
but
>> I heard you played a lot of tennis.
I played tennis at Rota, Spain, you
know, to on a NATO exercise. I'll have
you know, Tracy. It was a
It was a NATO military exercise and I
don't think I was at All right. Your
exercise was tennis.
>> Or your exercise was tennis.
>> by the way, I'd like to say that Jerez
de la Frontera was fantastic for wine
and sherry, so you know.
>> [music]
>> Joe, I want a t-shirt that says ruthless
utility maximizer. Black gold.
>> Let's talk about losers. Who cares? I've
decided I'm going to base my entire
personality going forward on campaigning
for a strategic pork reserve in the US.
Skulls Unlimited.
>> Ooh, what's the ticker for that?
>> No, I think that like in a couple years
the AI will do a really good job of
making the Odd Lots podcast.
>> I get more popular and successful? One
day that person will have the mandate of
heaven. We do have the perfect guest.
You're listening [music] to Lots More,
where we catch up with friends about
what's going on right now. Because even
when Odd Lots is over, there's always
Lots More. And we really do have the
perfect guest. [music]
I feel a little bit stupid.
>> Go on. But on Monday, obviously, Wait,
you're just just now for the first time?
If No, I'm just kidding.
>> Thanks, Joe. Thank you. Obviously, the
war with Iran happened on the weekend
and is still happening. And on Monday I
woke up and I was thinking about energy
markets and you know, geopolitics in the
Middle East. And I was trying to think
of someone who would be really good to
talk about shipping.
And I'm embarrassed to say it took me a
full 24 hours to remember that we
actually have marine chaos experts
basically on speed dial at the moment.
>> Well, it's perfect because we are
experiencing marine chaos, obviously.
We're recording this March 4th.
Yesterday, Trump posted on Truth Social
talking about the US actually playing a
role as sort of an insurer of last
resort. Because one of the things that
we've been seeing is like setting aside
the sort of logistical ability to get
goods out of the region, get whatever
out of the region. There's obviously the
question of can you get insurance? And
we know that, you know, prices are
soaring, etc. You know, insurance costs
getting too high could end trade flows
regardless of the actual logistics on
the ground and so forth. Well, not just
insurance premiums getting too high, but
insurance being pulled all together.
>> all together. That's right. So, they,
you know, they are their own entity
that's sort of like separate from
national, you know, there's nations and
then there's insurers and they have
quite a bit of say over what moves and
when and where. Well, all of this just
confirms my long-running suspicion, as
you know, that insurers actually control
the world in a very under-appreciated
way. We should talk to We need to insert
like a sound effect here. Speed dial our
marine chaos experts. They are, of
course, Margo Brock and Anton Posner.
They're the founders of Mercury Group,
which specializes in dry cargo and
global freight logistics. So, really the
perfect people to talk to about this
moment. Let's just talk about what
you're seeing right now with the Strait
of Hormuz. You have a lot of clients who
I assume have some presence there.
Again, you guys sort of specialize in
dry bulk, dry cargo, but you have a good
handle on what's going on. What are you
seeing and witnessing and living through
at the moment?
Sure. Yeah, it's always great for us to
be on during marine chaos time, right?
As I mentioned to Tracy yesterday, I
think that's going to be new business
cards for Margo and I. We're the chaos
expert. So, in addition, certainly, to
kick things off, right? In addition to
everyone knows oil and gas are flowing
through Strait of Hormuz in Persian
Gulf, which is the always the headline
commodity sector that that everyone
talks about in the region. You also have
things like outbound fertilizers coming
out of the region. You have outbound
aluminum being produced by Emirates
Global Aluminum and Qatalum and Alba
Aluminum Bahrain. You have inbound raw
materials for the aluminum production,
alumina that goes into aluminum
production known that needs to flow in.
You have containerized goods, right? You
have inbound grains going into the
Persian Gulf. So, there's a lot more
than just oil and gas that's affected
when there's problem in the region.
Right now, we're seeing in our world
that's heavy on metals, of course, is
being affected by the inability for Gulf
aluminum producers to be able to ship
aluminum out and moving out of the Gulf.
So, that's already created a spike in
global aluminum markets and there need
there's a shift at the moment going on.
I think Emirates Global Aluminum was the
one that said they're going to start
fulfilling orders with aluminum stock
piles that they have in other parts of
the world. So, we're starting to see an
effect on the markets that we're
involved in. Of course,
overall, diesel in the United States
jumped significantly over the past
couple of days. So, we're going to see
that trickle-down effect coming into the
world of our inland logistics in North
America, barge freight on the river
system, truck freight, rail freight,
where we're going to start seeing
potentially start seeing fuel surcharge
clauses kick into effect as diesel
starts to move up.
And then, so talk to us about the
insurance components cuz there is the
Yeah, there's the sort of reality of
moving goods, and then there's the
question of can you get these shipments
insured?
>> Well, can I just say I don't understand
insurance where like you have an a war
risk insurance policy and then something
happens and the insurers are like
actually we're going to cancel all the
war risk insurance.
>> Yeah, explain how this market works.
Yeah.
Well, war risk is an interesting
component of your policy because
depending upon where the policy is
written and what the custom is if it's a
London policy, a US policy,
you'll have different terms within your
policy, but they all come with a short
cancellation notice period on
specifically the war risk component. And
that cancellation term can be anywhere
from say two to seven days. I've heard
depending upon whether it's written on
London or a US policy or so forth.
And that's what's happened. Everyone put
out the notice immediately upon the war
and now this week is when all those
cancellation dates are hitting. So,
after that cancellation date, you could
rebuy war risk.
But now you're going to buy at a
significantly increased premium. So,
what I'm being told is the current
market is that where traditionally
your premium which is assessed on the
value, the declared value of your goods.
That's what we're insuring against. So,
your policy in total inclusive of your
war risk maybe might be something around
.0055%
of value. Now to carve out just the
add-on for war risk, they're seeing
offers coming anywhere from .5 to 1.5%.
>> 30x increase in that premium.
Yeah, so that's if you choose to have
war risk and then it you know, that will
push back into the rest of the
conversation that says
what ships are actually transiting in
war risk areas at this point because
we're seeing the pivot. We're seeing and
we're seeing that that market dropping
off very steeply right now.
>> Well, what types of goods would continue
to flow
logically or economically at these new
levels? What is the pivot? Yeah. So Joe,
I think a good answer to that question
right off the bat is let's take the
cargoes that have no choice. Okay.
>> One of our One of our ocean freight team
has a client and a ship currently
loading in Saudi Arabia in the Gulf
loading dry bulk cargo. The ship's in
port. It's loading. The ship's P&I club,
the insurance group that insures the
ship has issued a notification of the
cancellation. On the ship's The ship
side insurance, right? You've got two
sides. You have the cargo insurance
Margo was talking about in some detail
and then there's also the insurance on
the ship. Right. So that ship is
loading. It's received the notice that
their existing war risk coverage under
their ship's P&I
protection and indemnity policy has been
canceled. They're going to need to renew
it. The ship has to continue loading,
has to eventually sail at some point,
right? When she will, who knows? But
there's no choice but to re-up under the
higher insurance premium. That ship is
already in the Gulf. It's already loaded
cargo. So you have the cargo the cargo
interest, the shipper who owns the dry
bulk goods aboard the ship going to need
to have all risk cargo
insurance on their cargo and then the
ship owner also needs to renew their P&I
policy covering the ship and there's no
choice. Ship's there. So now it's going
to be a I think what one of the terms
when catching up with our our ocean
freight team earlier is a slugfest of
who who's going to pay. Yeah. Uh Margo
and I will old professor at New York
Maritime College of maritime law and
insurance with Jeffrey Weiss would have
always always said, "Everything we're
going to talk about this semester falls
into the category of who pays, right?
Who's responsible to pay?" Professor
Weiss was famous for that that who pays
phrase, and it comes into play exactly
these situations. So, just on this
point, can I ask you to explain very
simply, I guess, the ecosystem of
insurance and shipping and this idea
that, you know, you hear about things
like the club insurers and then you have
the reinsurers, and there seem to be all
these different layers. There's the
insurer for the cargo, there's the
insurer for the ship, as you laid out.
And then there's this question of who's
actually going to pay it because you
have, I guess, a chain that exists
between, you know, the charterers, the
ship owners, the end buyers of the
cargo. Can you just lay that out kind of
very simply for us?
Yeah, pretty.
And of course, we're freight people, not
insurance experts, and all going well,
without mentioning names, and I'm
working on connecting Tracy and I
discussed yesterday working on
connecting somebody very key at one of
the world leading P&I clubs to
potentially
>> Well, now now you've said it in public,
so the pressure's the [laughter]
pressure's on.
>> Oh, yeah. Notice I'm not mentioning a
gender or a name or anything that gives
away anything other than that. So, we'll
see. Fingers crossed that
The pronouns are they/them.
You've already uh you've already
gendered the ships.
>> [laughter]
>> Which is
Sorry, it's a tangent. I was just
reading something about how, you know,
it's very you know, the English doesn't
have gendered nouns, with the exception
of ships. Anyway, sorry, keep going.
Yeah, sure. Exactly. So, yeah, to make
it to break it down very simply, right?
The ship owner carries protection and
indemnity insurance, hull insurance,
those policies that cover the ship and
its engines and so forth. The all of the
physical attributes of the vessel and so
forth. That's what the ship owner
carries on it. Now, in a contract of
carriage, whether it's a charter party
or a bill of lading, a liner bill of
lading, that has a limitation of
liability to the cargo owner in that
contract of carriage. US law is covered
by the Carriage of Goods by Seas Act,
COGSA, which typically carries a $500
per package or per ton limitation of
liability. So, the ship owner is only
liable to a certain extent of value of
the goods that the shipper is carrying
on the ship. Now, we flip over to the
cargo owner side, and the cargo owner,
knowing that the ship owner only has a
certain limitation of liability, the
cargo owner will go out with the right
guidance, will go will get all risks
cargo insurance. And that's to provide
them the coverage for the value of the
goods that they're carrying on board the
ship over and above whatever the ship
owner's limitation of liability is. When
a when there's a casualty and a loss, as
a cargo owner, you want to be able to
collect from your all risks cargo
insurance policy and let them fight it
out with the ship owner, not be stuck in
arbitration in London or in Singapore or
New York fighting it out later on. And
then there's another type of insurance,
too, when you're chartering a ship as a
ship as a cargo interest, you get
charterer's liability insurance is a
pretty common. And that covers the
shipper, the cargo interest from other
liability elements. Let's say the ship
has a casualty and people are killed or
hurt, there's going to be lawsuits filed
against everyone involved in the ship,
and charterer's liability insurance
covers the charterer, the cargo interest
liability as it relates to in other
damages or if the ship is damaged by
their stevedores loading the ship or
discharging the ship. So, other other
things that can come into play there,
too. So, I don't know, I tried to lay it
out as kind of clear as possible, but I
know it's convoluted. Yeah, there's a
lot of moving parts.
>> [music]
>> Talk to us about the announcement from
Trump that the US could get involved and
be some sort of playing insurance role
here. What can that do?
Is that And is that novel? Is that Have
you Is there any precedent for anything
like that?
Yeah, this you know, this news just you
know, came out and you know,
the president will often say things that
then need to be implemented by the
bureaucrats, right? So, the mechanics of
it are always complicated. There's
precedent for US government agencies
providing insurance. The Export-Import
Bank, for example, offers trade credit
insurance. Like, let's take that, for
example, right? As for protection and
indemnity, P&I insurance on ships, I'm
sure uh although I don't have
any specific instances, but I'm sure
there's been precedent for that in
history. So, I don't think that that's
too much of a stretch for the government
to necessarily come in and offer some
kind of safety net for ships to be able
to get P&I insurance. What may be more
complicated is maybe having US Navy or
Coast Guard escorting ships in the
Strait of Hormuz. That's not an easy
task. That was done, I think what was
it, the 1980s when we reflagged tankers
and put American flags on them to
protect them from the Iran-Iraq War at
the time when we had Navy ships
escorting ships through the Strait of
Hormuz, but that is a expensive
proposition. It's not perfect, right?
Missiles can and attacks can get
through. You're putting US Navy ships,
you're taking them out of circulation
and out of deployment for other
purposes, and you're putting them very
much in harm's way. That approach to the
Strait of Hormuz, navigationally
speaking, is delicate, to say the least,
and it can be very exposing. What's it
like actually sailing through the
strait?
I have not sailed through the strait.
Margo hasn't either, right? Both of us
were
Both of us stayed a lot shoreside after
I sailed through the Panama Canal on a
on a Navy tanker, which was which really
was a fun topic with
with Tom and Paul Sweeney one morning
when it looked like we were going to
take over Panama the day before. Oh,
yeah, of course. Well, okay, actually,
this reminds me
just setting aside the insurance
component, do people want to be moving
stuff through the Strait of Hormuz at
the moment? I imagine if you're
captaining or crewing a ship, I would
love to captain a ship, by the way, but
you wouldn't want to be in the strait at
the moment, right? There are human
considerations beyond just how am I
going to get compensation for the cargo
or a lost vessel?
Obviously, it's a logistical nightmare
to get through there. Safety is
concerned, personnel.
Um, this morning, a small container
vessel, I think it was 1,800 TEUs, 20-ft
units, was hit with, they're saying, an
unknown projectile hit it above the
waterline, put the engine room on fire.
They just abandoned ship. They took they
pulled the whole crew off
and abandoned ship. I mean, you don't
even stay there to fight the fire. You
just get out of there. So, yeah, people
don't want to be there. And if you were
on the liquid side, petroleum's,
crude's, you have a harder time avoiding
going through that region because of
what it is, right? That's the source of
a lot of our global oil.
But other commodities, dry in large
part, we can avoid it.
So, to Anton's comments,
the aluminum sector has, in large part,
shifted deviated from that area for now,
but in addition ships are navigating
away
and it means a longer transit time,
which means a more costly voyage, so
it's less desirable. It does increase
freight rates.
But it's safer, your goods are safer and
when you start adding on these new war
risk premiums, if you're going to take
them, I'd venture to guess it's still
cheaper to take the long way around now.
>> So it's the kind of thing for certain
liquids, there's no choice. Like the it
has to flow through there. It sounds
like for some of these other things,
aluminum, otherwise, for now, either
there's going to be some long route or
it's just that is not going to be a
source. If we're talking about aluminum,
there will just be less there will just
be less aluminum in the world or some
existing source of aluminum will ramp up
their production. Right. Like you take
Emirates Global Aluminum for example,
Joe, that the United Arab Emirates have
the luxury of having ports and the
ability to potentially load ships on the
Gulf of Oman side outside of the Persian
Gulf, right? As Margot said, you know,
longer route, potentially not ideal.
This is not where they typically load.
One thing I haven't looked at is
Emirates Global Aluminum shifting some
of that aluminum loading to ports on the
Gulf of Oman. I got to take a look I got
to take a look at that, but um I wanted
to say, you know, in in Tracy's question
about what a cruise you know, captains
of ships thinking on this, too. I'm
going to take you back, Tracy, to uh way
to answer your question. Imagine two
crazy people came up with a scheme to
load a teddy bear in a container and
then ship it into the Persian Gulf. Do
you want to risk your life as a ship's
crew like for somebody's teddy bear, you
know, stuck in the middle of a 20-ft
container or are you getting off the
ship and saying, "Yeah, I'm not risking
my life for that, right?"
>> [laughter]
>> I was going to say as a side note,
though, to that alternate plan on the
Gulf of Oman,
I was reading that they're reporting
missiles and drones in the Gulf of Oman
as well.
So, in addition to the Strait of Hormuz,
>> by the way, listeners, it's helpful to
pull up a map during some of these
conversations because yes, you can see
very clearly Oman has the benefit by and
large. I don't know exactly where their
ports are on its coast, but yes, the
Strait of Hormuz is less of an issue for
them, whereas for the UAE, they're right
in it.
Yeah, unless the Houthis start up again,
right? So, the Houthis have been an
interesting one. Mark and I were just
talking about this ahead of the ahead of
coming on. The Houthis have put the
threat out there that they're going to
restart attacks in the Red Sea and off
the coast of Yemen and and potentially
significantly deter traffic from heading
into the Suez Canal, but they haven't
started any attacks yet. The threat's
out there. Already, you see container
ships, container lines diverting ships
to the Cape of Good Hope to round
southern tip of Africa to avoid heading
into the Red Sea in case the Houthis do
start start up with the missiles and
attacks and boarding ships again,
but they've as of at least 15 minutes
ago before we get started this podcast,
it's out there as a threat, but the
Houthis haven't done anything yet. The
threat in and of itself already causes
reactions though, right? Yeah, I
remember I think the big port in Oman is
Salalah, and I only know this cuz I
visited there once, but like it's pretty
close to Yemen, right? Like I don't I
don't think there've been any
[clears throat] direct attacks, but
certainly relatively close. This reminds
me though, have you seen any early signs
of people doing maybe insurance
arbitrage where, you know, like certain
flags or certain jurisdictions or
entities are willing to run the Hormuz
in a way that I guess Western companies
just aren't at the moment, or is it too
soon for that and too uncertain?
Yeah, I think too too soon for that,
Tracy. Not Hormuz, right? We did see on
the Hormuz situation of the Persian Gulf
haven't seen that happening. There's
some ships moving through, so it may be
happening maybe with some of the very
few ships that are moving through, but
it may be a a good anecdote to kind of
bring up here was when we were dealing
with uh you know, a year or plus or so
ago when the Houthis were really really
uh ramping up their attacks, there was a
lot of chatter about fact that Chinese
had uh essentially uh the Chinese easy
pass toll transponder to get past the
Houthis. So, we're seeing talk at that
time of working with Chinese ship
operators and Chinese ship owners that
were more competitive because they could
still send their ships through the Red
Sea and into the Suez Canal, whereas
more Western-operated vessels that could
be tied to countries that were
unfriendly to the Houthis had a really
target on them, right? So, so we're
seeing some of that arbitrage a bit
during the when the Houthis were at full
[music] swing.
>> [music]
>> One of the impressions that I get with
when we have incidents such as this is
that there's a certain non-linearity or
that like things really compound over
time. That you know, one day disruption
is one thing, a two-day disruption is
another thing, but by the time it gets
to 10 days or 2 weeks or a month, then
it really is it gets exponential. Like
talk about talk to us about the risks
and how they compound the longer the war
goes on or the longer the disruptions
are in this particular part of the
world.
Well, since is that the risk to
>> Yeah, yeah, global supply chain. global
supply chain is that the risk to global
supply
>> chains for all of this stuff the longer
this goes on.
Well, I think we reflect back. We've
lived it very recently in a non-war
situation in just what we saw during the
aftermath of COVID when shipping just
and I think we actually spoke then about
this. Um shipping just grew out of
control
and we saw all the subsequent delays and
that was really just because of system
overuse, congestion, and ultimately
you know, a bit of failure cuz our
system just wasn't big enough for as
much as we were trying to ship during
that period. That was when we had
container ships and cargo ships stacked
off the port of LA.
We had clients with steel coming in
where they said
you could be on you could be on anchor
for 4 to 6 weeks waiting for your birth.
What do you want to do? Then you start
to have to look at the bottom line of
your dollars and cents and that's what
we're going to see again.
Like anything, it just continues to back
up, right? So we have cargo on vessels
that aren't getting where they need to
be. If it does, it's at a significantly
increased cost.
Going forward, if you want to book your
freight
the baseline, the start the starting
cost is going to be that much higher
because of risk, because of increased
sailing distances that you have to go
and once you start using up your assets
for longer periods of time, supply and
demand, now capacity starts to shrink.
So, it really becomes quite the domino
effect and the longer it goes
the more out of whack our system gets,
the prices go up and that's where we can
talk about
this short-term is the price of the of
commodities and that's where our jumping
jumping off point is as we talk about
oil and we're talking about aluminum and
fertilizers and cements and all these
raw materials or semi-finished goods.
But down the line, we all start to feel
it as we did in post-COVID
because that effect does start to
trickle into our retail as well.
>> you know, this has the potential to be a
disruption on
the scale of COVID or like we talking
about that ballpark if this goes on long
enough?
I think that's the wild card. How long
does it go on for? Yeah, there's going
to be winners and losers, right? In
addition to the losers,
also always winners too, right? Going
back to the Houthi mess, no one was more
excited than ship fuel suppliers down in
Southern Africa, right? With all the
ships moving moving through the area
that needed to refuel in South African
ports rather than in ports in the Red
Sea and so forth. So, so supply chains
shift and eventually start to set in. Is
this going to your question, Joe? Right?
Is this going to be at the scale of what
we saw with COVID? Boy, I hope not. I
mean, COVID hit every every part of the
world, every port in the world that had
problems and so forth. So, I think it
would take it would take a quite a bit
for it to get to that that stage. But
we're But already, as I mentioned
earlier, right? With the price of diesel
fuel in the US jumping, that's already
going to start hitting transport of of
local goods going from distribution
centers to the public you know, local
public supermarket here in Florida. So,
so it's going it's trickling down
already. We're going to start seeing it.
So, Margo and I bracing for the fuel
surcharges coming up. Yeah. This also
reminds me, I think even before recent
events, we were starting to see freight
rates pick up a little bit in the US and
some people were talking about a
potential turn in the cycle. I imagine
higher oil prices will, you know, eat
into some of
the industry's profits. But before this
week's events, did it feel like we were
starting to see a little bit of a turn?
Yeah, we just probably recently working
on 2026 barge barge contracts for
particularly for northbound goods like
steel, metals that are part of our
typical business. And Margo was on the
front lines on that and we didn't see
any much in the way of significant
increases, right? Margo, what do you
think for Okay.
>> Yeah. No.
No. Routine increases. It was nothing
terrible.
Yeah, it seems like it's a lot on the uh
yeah, the trucking the freight. Yeah,
truck freight has been
Yeah, where things are more volatile.
Trucking is so so reactive to the
market.
>> Much more liquid market, right? With
thousands of small carriers and you
know, their operators and so forth. And
then, you know, rail freight rail
freight is the exact opposite of the
truck freight market from liquidity to
monopolies. Well, let's not call them
monopolies actually.
No, but we know in trucks that you have
a down period and then thousands and
thousands of owner operators will come
out of the market and go out of business
and so and so supply swings down and up
in trucking in a way that would be
unimaginable in something like Right.
Exactly.
>> Yeah. For those reasons. Yeah.
Yeah. So, I know we've we've said
multiple times now that the wild card is
really the length and how long this goes
on for. But are there any, I guess,
proactive steps that you're taking in
your own business to prepare for further
disruption? Mhm. Good question.
Because where we fit into the into the
supply chain is that our clients are the
traders.
So, we're managing their supply chain.
What protective actions or course
correctors they have in mind really will
relate to their trading book, which is
going to probably be
sourcing in alternate locations as
needed if you can't get your commodity
out of the Middle East or an affected
region. When we dial into domestic
logistics here, North American
logistics,
we will see everything continue to flow.
And we don't expect as much a disruption
of
capacity. The disruption will be prices.
But we'll still be moving moving things,
and we will still see truck, rail,
barge, and you know, ocean freight will
be more of the swing item here on what
are the lanes where the freight is
moving.
Joe, did you ever hear about the story
of the ships that were stuck in I think
the Suez Canal for like years and years
and years during the Six-Day War?
No. So, the crews that were stuck on the
ships like started their own postal
service and built their own little
society, but
I did It's a very interesting story. I
certainly hope nothing like that happens
this time around.
>> [music]
>> Lots More is produced by Dasha Bennett,
Carmen Rodriguez, and Kelly Brooks.
Please rate, review, and subscribe to
Odd Lots and Lots More on your favorite
podcast platforms. And for even more
beyond Lots More, go to
bloomberg.com/odd lots and chat with
fellow listeners in our Discord,
And don't forget that Bloomberg
subscribers can listen to all of our
podcasts absolutely ad-free. All you
have to do is find the Bloomberg channel
on Apple Podcasts and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.